Arbos 51 gas target update (#2990)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: docs/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/gas-and-fees.mdx

### Child chain gas fees

Child chain gas fees work similarly to Ethereum: a transaction consumes gas, which is multiplied by the current basefee to determine the child chain gas fee.

The basefee is set by a multi-target pricing algorithm that regulates fees across multiple time horizons. This algorithm uses several <a data-quicklook-from="gas-target">gas targets</a>, each paired with its own <a data-quicklook-from="adjustment-window">adjustment window</a>. Higher targets with shorter windows (for example, 60 Mgas/s over 9 seconds) absorb transient demand spikes without triggering aggressive fee increases. Lower targets with longer windows govern sustained throughput, with the lowest target measured over 86,400 seconds (one day) establishing the chain's long-term capacity.

> The algorithm tracks a gas backlog for each target. Whenever a transaction consumes gas, that gas is added to the backlog. Each second, the corresponding gas target is subtracted from its backlog (the backlog cannot go below zero). If backlog grows, the basefee increases exponentially to slow usage; if backlog shrinks, the basefee decreases to welcome more transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The algorithm tracks a gas backlog for each target. Whenever a transaction consumes gas, that gas is added to the backlog. Each second, the corresponding gas target is subtracted from its backlog (the backlog cannot go below zero). If backlog grows, the basefee increases exponentially to discourage usage; if the backlog shrinks, the basefee decreases incentivize more demand. This behavior is intended to bring usage of the chain to an equilibrium defined by the long term gas target.
```

### Child chain gas fees

Child chain gas fees work similarly to Ethereum: a transaction consumes gas, which is multiplied by the current basefee per gas (e.g. gwei/gas) to determine the child chain transaction fee (denominated in gwei).

> The basefee is set by a pricing algorithm that regulates fees across multiple time horizons. This algorithm uses several <a data-quicklook-from="gas-target">gas targets</a>, each paired with its own <a data-quicklook-from="adjustment-window">adjustment window</a>. Higher targets with shorter windows (for example, 60 Mgas/s over 9 seconds) absorb transient demand spikes without triggering aggressive fee increases. Lower targets with longer windows address slower traffic, with the lowest target measured over 86,400 seconds (one day) establishing the chain's long-term capacity.

Author: yep! I had missed that one, thanks

The algorithm tracks a gas backlog for each target. Whenever a transaction consumes gas, that gas is added to the backlog. Each second, the corresponding gas target is subtracted from its backlog (the backlog cannot go below zero). If backlog grows, the basefee increases exponentially to discourage usage; if the backlog shrinks, the basefee decreases incentivize more demand. This behavior is intended to bring usage of the chain to an equilibrium defined by the long term gas target.

This layered structure creates a dampening effect: overlapping windows smooth volatility at their respective timescales, reducing peak gas prices during congestion while preserving responsiveness to genuine capacity constraints.

> The pricing algorithm uses multiple gas targets, each paired with its own adjustment window:

Author: removed it: too risky to try and keep up to date
